life on earth really is hard enough as
it is
everybody has to deal at some point with
loss of a loved one everyone has to deal
with suffering
definitely everyone will have to deal
with illness at some point in their
lives
when you are young you're told that when
you have an
illness that you'll get better or
sometimes you'll have the experience of
learning about a family member who is
sick
and won't get better and is going to die
sometimes this can happen suddenly
seemingly out of nowhere
when i was four years old i had to learn
that one day my
grandpa was here the next day he was
gone what do we tell kids
at that age when they're four years old
in the culture that i grew up in in the
christian household that i grew up in
what we told kids is you'll see your
grandpa again in heaven
now as i got older i learned that this
was
not only something that adults told
children but it's something that adults
tell themselves
people still live with these narratives
people really want to form a narrative
out of the suffering
out of the pain that they experience out
of the loss and heartbreak that they
feel
i don't know if this is totally natural
to human nature but it's something that
we're introduced to
so early in life that it becomes second
nature to us that we
want to make a narrative out of
something difficult that happens
in one's life now it's a decision
will you make the narrative more
exciting will you make the narrative
more evocative make your audience feel
something by adding something to the
story that isn't totally
true will you add something to the story
to make it more meaningful and emotional
for yourself
it's not only the narrative that we tell
somebody else it's the narrative that we
tell ourselves every day about our
suffering
about our illness about our
experience with disease with illness i
know from
personal experiences i know from family
members
that living with a chronic illness can
be extremely debilitating
and unlike when you're a child when you
learn when you have an illness either
you get better
and you're healthy again or you continue
getting worse
and you die when you're a child it's
difficult to understand that there is
a kind of middle path where you're still
sick
you don't get better but you're not so
sick that you're dying
it's this middle road that a lot of
people are every day experiencing
now when i was 23 i was learning about
a plant-based diet i learned about
veganism this was
at the time very inspiring to me because
all of these diseases that i thought
were incurable chronic all these
diseases that i thought were
inheritable and genetic they could be so
much
improved by a vegan diet it seemed to be
that this is the cure this is the cure
for what's ailing
all of american society at least obesity
diabetes
heart disease cancers
why wouldn't you do it and not only were
plant-based doctors promising cures to
heart disease
cancers they were also promising cures
to
other conditions which on the surface
you wouldn't expect there are chronic
conditions
chronic ailments things that
people are told at some point by doctors
that no this isn't something that
is going to get better it's something
that you can manage
the pain the difficulty every day
it's something that you will learn to
live with
plant-based doctors were saying no this
is something that you can cure
with a plant-based diet now i've had to
learn and come to
another crushing realization that
this isn't true and there are some
diseases
many conditions that a plant-based diet
won't cure
there is no panacea there is no
one thing that is going to make the
disease go away
sometimes what do you do what do you do
when your
your life is this middle path it's not
that you are going to
get better it's not that you are going
to have perfect health
and it's not that you're so sick that
you're going to die
in a matter of years you are going to
have to live your life
with this permanent condition this
chronic ailment
that makes your life worse every day
there's a lot wrapped in it
into this it's it's really difficult i
think
it's natural for people to look around
at their peers they're
looking at other family members looking
at others and saying
why me why is this happening to me the
number one thing that we want to hear is
that
there's some purpose behind it there's
some meaning and if there's not
we want to make it for ourself we want
to make there be a narrative
that we can live by this is our story
right this is what it means to have an
illness and to get through it to manage
it
when i was younger i can remember
feeling multiple different ways about it
when people would say that when somebody
experienced an illness
or when somebody died in a tragic
accident
that this is all part of god's plan this
is all trying to teach us
something there's a lesson to be learned
and god works in mysterious ways
i can remember at various times feeling
comforted by this
and thinking you know what yeah these
things might seem random
but there's some plan there's some big
plan you know that's trying to teach you
something i've had to reflect that
that's
really screwed up you know if it is the
case that
god is the father and he's taking care
of all his children
what kind of messed up father is this
that wants you to suffer that wants you
to go through all this pain and torment
and that it sets up a sick idea
of what an authority figure is somebody
that
puts you through some suffering and pain
to teach you something that's
that's the ordeal that you go through in
life and it's
and it's part of somebody's plan it's
part of this
omnipotent omniscient all-knowing power
that this is what their plan is when i
started thinking about this
you know when family members were sick
with chronic conditions i thought
why is god doing this what did i do to
deserve this what did
my relative do to deserve this when i've
dealt with chronic illness myself i've
thought
am i being punished for something you
know like what did i do wrong
there's a good amount of resentment and
anger that can come up from this
and if there's one positive thing that i
can think of that comes from
illness that comes from disease is that
it gets people to question these things
and ultimately question the narratives
that are told to them
now all the time we're picking up
narratives not only from
our parents not only from our family
members and friends
we're picking them up from the movies we
watch from the television shows that we
consume
these little phrases that we we hear we
glom onto
right it's all part of god's plan or
there's
something to this this is your story
right you're gonna get through this
adversity this is part of your struggle
part of your
understanding of life is getting through
this
and learning that even though it seems
impossible at times
even though when you're given a
diagnosis you might think
this is something i don't want to live
with i think that's one of the first
thoughts that people come through like
why why am i going to have to live with
this i don't want to live with this
we have to learn over time that life
keeps going
every day you have to keep trying and
find the motivation
and ambition to live a life that's worth
living
even though it seems that the conditions
that you have been given
are just so terrible you don't want to
live with them so
we're picking up all these bits and
pieces
of narratives that we've heard people
telling us
anything to soften the blow anything to
make it
less terrible than what we really know
that it is
and it's rare to find somebody who's
willing to actually
be honest with you and not be an
about it you know
somebody who's really genuinely trying
to tell you in a caring way like
no this is not for some higher purpose
this is random it's not your fault
that you have this chronic disease and
there might be nothing in it there might
be meaningless
suffering that happens but the point of
your life
is not to get lost in the meaningless
suffering
to lament your suffering constantly
it's to find the will the courage
to keep going and find meaning and
purpose in your life
regardless and what i've seen in
people's lives is
that they make narratives out of their
suffering
either it's themselves that have a
chronic condition and then they become
that condition they take this on as
their identity
or they have a child who is born with
some condition
and that becomes their identity i'm a
parent of some child with
cystic fibrosis you know that is that is
who i am that is what i do every day
it's natural that's part of your life
and it might
feel like the most important part of
your life but it's important
to actually come up with something for
yourself come up with
a meaning to your life that isn't
dictated by these
random outside forces something that
brings to your life
a sense of reason and rationality
rather than defining your life based on
these irrational
circumstances that you're born into or
that
you happen to fall into for no at no
fault of your own
it can be really difficult if not
impossible to
be detached about one's own suffering or
the suffering of a loved one
but this is very important for realizing
the choice that you have in life to be
detached enough
to understand how you're presenting
yourself are you presenting yourself as
a victim
of the circumstances that you have are
you presenting yourself
as somebody who has this condition and
that's what your life story is going to
be
or is it going to be somewhere in your
identity is it going to be
that yes in my past i was diagnosed with
this disease every day i live with it
but this isn't who i am i'm not a
disease and i'm not
going to be this person that defines
their life
off of their disease and it's hard to
form your own identity
it's hard to find what drives you what's
going to motivate you
every day to try to make the world a
better place when a chronic condition is
added into the mix
it almost becomes easy for people to
form their own identity
because they make their illness their
identity illness can be
so overwhelming dealing with one's own
illness
or dealing with a family member's
illness can take up so much time in your
life that it becomes your identity
this becomes who you are rather than who
you were before a person with drive
and ambition and one's own purpose
and intent in life the disease the
diagnosis that you're given
becomes your intent becomes your purpose
more and more
everybody can choose how they present
themselves online
it seems to be an easy choice when
somebody has a condition
when somebody has a disease when
somebody has something that happens to
them that's out of their control
but takes over their life every single
day this becomes their form of activism
increasing awareness of this disease
becomes their
motivation in life becomes their purpose
in life rather than being beholden to
your illness
to promoting your illness as a cause
isn't it better to
embrace the kind of choice that you have
in life the
optionality of how you present yourself
not only
with people in real life but especially
these days
with how you present yourself on the
internet and what kind of causes
you devote your time to are you going to
make your condition
your diagnosis your illness your
identity
are you going to become an activist for
this identity isn't it better to make
your life about the
drive and ambition you have outside of
your illness rather than to make your
life about
that illness